Docs: Instrument a backend plugin (#547)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/create-a-plugin/extend-a-plugin/instrument-a-backend-plugin.md

---
id: instrument-a-backend-plugin

> title: Instrument a backend plugin

Reviewer: How about "Instrument a backend plugin for logs, metrics and traces" or "Equip a backend plugin for logs, metrics and traces"

> title: Instrument a backend plugin

Author: I was considering reusing "add" as used for many of the other pages and the now removed "Add distributed tracing for backend plugins". So I suggest "Add logs, metrics and traces for backend plugins". WDYT?

> title: Instrument a backend plugin

Author: Pushed my suggested changes, let me know what you think

description: How to instrument backend plugins using logs, metrics and traces.
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - instrument
  - instrumentation
  - logs
  - metrics
  - distributed tracing
  - tracing
  - backend
  - back-end
---

# Instrument a backend plugin

> Guidance, conventions and best practices for instrumenting backend plugins using logs, metrics and traces to make it easier to diagnose and resolve issues for both plugin developers and Grafana operators.

Author: Using equip feels wrong/weird to me. So use add here as well would be my suggestion, i.e. "Guidance, conventions and best practices for adding logs, metrics and traces for backend plugins to make it easier to diagnose and resolve issues for both plugin developers and Grafana operators."

WDYT?

> Guidance, conventions and best practices for instrumenting backend plugins using logs, metrics and traces to make it easier to diagnose and resolve issues for both plugin developers and Grafana operators.

Author: Pushed my suggested changes, let me know what you think

## Logs

Logs are files that record events, warnings and errors as they occur within a software environment. Most logs include contextual information, such as the time an event occurred and which user or endpoint was associated with it.

### Implement logging in your plugin

Using the global logger, `backend.Logger`, from the [backend package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend) works everywhere and for most use cases.

**Example:**

```go
package plugin

import (
    "errors"

    "github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend"
)

func main() {
    backend.Logger.Debug("Debug msg", "someID", 1)
    backend.Logger.Info("Info msg", "queryType", "default")
    backend.Logger.Warning("Warning msg", "key", "value")

>     backend.Logger.Error("Error msg", "error", errors.New("An error occurred"))

Reviewer 2: It's clear from this code example but maybe it would be useful to include what the output of those lines is. (or at least one)

When reviewing some community plugins, I encountered some instances where developers did not realize that those are key/value pairs and output in logfmt. They were using the logger in the wrong way (logging values directly, instead of keys)

Author: I'm showing that under the "Inspect logs locally" section. Think that's enough or should I link to it perhaps?

Reviewer 2: Yes I think that's great. I didn't read up to that point when I made that comment, but in this document we have plenty of examples and it should be clear to the developer what it will output :smile:

}
```

:::note

The `backend.Logger` is a convenient wrapper over `log.DefaultLogger` from the [log package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/log) which you also can use to access the global logger.

:::

> #### Reuse logger with certain key/value pairs

Reviewer 2: This isn't strictly related to this PR, but when rendered in docusaurus, to me this H4 header looks like normal text. It took me a few seconds to realize it was a new paragraph:
![immagine](https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/assets/16373015/015d4e7f-10d5-499f-81cc-5fb56ed4d036)

Maybe it's just me? cc @josmperez

Reviewer 2: Sounds good! :+1:

    "github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend"
    "github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/instancemgmt"
)

func NewDatasource(ctx context.Context, settings backend.DataSourceInstanceSettings) (instancemgmt.Instance, error) {
    // instantiates a logger that will include the datasource UID
    // key/value pair over the life-time of this instance.
    logger := backend.Logger.With("dsUID", settings.UID)

    return &Datasource{
        logger: logger,
    }, nil
}

func (ds *Datasource) QueryData(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
    ds.logger.Debug("Debug msg", "someID", 1)
    ds.logger.Info("Info msg", "queryType", "default")
    ds.logger.Warning("Warning msg", "key", "value")
    ds.logger.Error("Error msg", "error", errors.New("An error occurred"))
}
```

:::note

You can also use `backend.NewLoggerWith` from the [backend package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend) which is a helper method that calls `log.New().With(args...)` from the [log package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/log).

:::

#### Use a contextual logger

> Use a contextual logger to automatically include additional key/value pairs attached to `context.Context`, e.g. `traceID`, to allow correlating logs with traces and/or correlate logs with a common identifier. You can create a new contextual logger by using the `FromContext` method on your instantiated logger and can also be combined when [reusing logger with certain key/value pairs](#reuse-logger-with-certain-keyvalue-pairs). Using a contextual logger is recommended whenever you have access to a `context.Context`.

Reviewer: Please review the second sentence of the above suggestion carefully for accuracy. It seems a bit unclear to me. Combining with what?

> Use a contextual logger to automatically include additional key/value pairs attached to `context.Context`, e.g. `traceID`, to allow correlating logs with traces and/or correlate logs with a common identifier. You can create a new contextual logger by using the `FromContext` method on your instantiated logger and can also be combined when [reusing logger with certain key/value pairs](#reuse-logger-with-certain-keyvalue-pairs). Using a contextual logger is recommended whenever you have access to a `context.Context`.

Author: Looks good to me. You're combining the contextual logger, which includes contextual key-value pairs,  with a reusable logger that has key-value pairs set.

:::note

Make sure you are using at least [grafana-plugin-sdk-go v0.186.0](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/releases/tag/v0.186.0). See [Update the Go SDK](../develop-a-plugin/work-with-backend#update-the-go-sdk) for update instructions.

:::

> By default, the following key/value pairs are included in logs when using a contextual logger:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the following key-value pairs are included in logs when using a contextual logger:
```

> - **pluginID:** The plugin identifier, e.g. grafana-github-datasource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **pluginID:** The plugin identifier. For example, `grafana-github-datasource`.
```

> - **endpoint:** The request being handled, i.e. callResource, checkHealth, collectMetrics, queryData, runStream, subscribeStream or publishStream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **endpoint:** The request being handled; that is, `callResource`, `checkHealth`, `collectMetrics`, `queryData`, `runStream`, `subscribeStream`, or `publishStream`.
```

- **traceID:** If available, includes the distributed trace identifier.
- **dsName:** If available, the name of the configured datasource instance.
- **dsUID:** If available, the unique identifier (UID) of the configured datasource instance.

> - **uname:** If available, the username of the user that made the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **uname:** If available, the username of the user who made the request.
```

**Example:**

```go
package plugin

import (
    "context"
    "errors"

    "github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend"
    "github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/instancemgmt"
)

func NewDatasource(ctx context.Context, settings backend.DataSourceInstanceSettings) (instancemgmt.Instance, error) {
    // instantiates a logger that will include the datasource UID

>     // key/value pair over the life-time of this instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // key-value pair over the lifetime of this instance.
```

    logger := backend.Logger.With("dsUID", settings.UID)

    return &Datasource{
        logger:   logger,
    }, nil
}

func (ds *Datasource) QueryData(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
    ctxLogger := ds.logger.FromContext(ctx)
    ctxLogger.Debug("Debug msg", "someID", 1)
    ctxLogger.Info("Info msg", "queryType", "default")
    ctxLogger.Warning("Warning msg", "key", "value")
    ctxLogger.Error("Error msg", "error", errors.New("An error occurred"))
}
```

#### Include additional contextual information in logs

> If you want to propagate additional contextual key/value pairs to subsequent code/logic you can use the [log.WithContextualAttributes](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/log#WithContextualAttributes) function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to propagate additional contextual key-value pairs to subsequent code/logic you can use the [log.WithContextualAttributes](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/log#WithContextualAttributes) function.
```

**Example:**

```go
func (ds *Datasource) QueryData(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
    ctxLogger := ds.logger.FromContext(ctx)
    ctxLogger.Debug("Debug msg", "someID", 1)
    ctxLogger.Info("Info msg", "queryType", "default")
    ctxLogger.Warning("Warning msg", "key", "value")
    ctxLogger.Error("Error msg", "error", errors.New("An error occurred"))

    for _, q := range req.Queries {
        childCtx = log.WithContextualAttributes(ctx, []any{"refID", q.RefID, "queryType", q.QueryType})
        ds.handleQuery(childCtx, q)
    }
}
```

> ### Best practices/recommendations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Best practices
```

> - Start the log message with a capital letter, e.g. `logger.Info("Hello world")` instead of `logger.Info("hello world")`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Start the log message with a capital letter; for example, `logger.Info("Hello world")` instead of `logger.Info("hello world")`.
```

> - The log message should be an identifier for the log entry, try to avoid parameterization, e.g. `logger.Debug(fmt.Sprintf(“Something happened, got argument %d”, “arg”)), in favor of key-value pairs for additional data, e.g. `logger.Info(“Something happened”, “argument”, “arg”).

Reviewer 2: ![immagine](https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/assets/16373015/57c38789-7303-42e1-b0c4-2860d6815411)

:point_down: 

```suggestion
- The log message should be an identifier for the log entry, try to avoid parameterization, e.g. `logger.Debug(fmt.Sprintf(“Something happened, got argument %d”, “arg”))`, in favor of key-value pairs for additional data, e.g. `logger.Info(“Something happened”, “argument”, “arg”)`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- The log message should be an identifier for the log entry, try to avoid parameterization; for example,  `logger.Debug(fmt.Sprintf(“Something happened, got argument %d”, “arg”))`, in favor of key-value pairs for additional data; for example, `logger.Info(“Something happened”, “argument”, “arg”)`.
```

> - Prefer using camelCase style when naming log keys, e.g. remoteAddr or userID, to be consistent with Go identifiers.

Reviewer 2: Nit:

```suggestion
- Prefer using camelCase style when naming log keys, e.g. `remoteAddr` or `userID`, to be consistent with Go identifiers.
```

Reviewer: Replace "e.g." with "for example". See https://developers.google.com/style/abbreviations#dont-use

Author: ```suggestion
- Prefer using camelCase style when naming log keys; for example, `remoteAddr` or `userID`, to be consistent with Go identifiers.
```

> - Use the key `error` when logging Go errors, e.g. `logger.Error("Something failed", "error", errors.New("An error occurred")`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use the key `error` when logging Go errors, e.g. `logger.Error("Something failed", "error", errors.New("An error occurred"))`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Use the key `error` when logging Go errors; for example, `logger.Error("Something failed", "error", errors.New("An error occurred"))`.
```

> - Use the key `error` when logging Go errors, e.g. `logger.Error("Something failed", "error", errors.New("An error occurred")`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the key `error` when logging Go errors; for example, `logger.Error("Something failed", "error", errors.New("An error occurred")`.
```

- Use a contextual logger whenever you have access to a `context.Context`.
- Do not log sensitive information, such as data source credentials or IP addresses, or other personally identifiable information.

> #### Validate and sanitize input coming from user input

Author: Room for improvement/possible to skip this. I think the SDK/Grafana should validate/sanitize to ease developer experience.

> If log messages or key/value pairs originate from user input they should be validated and sanitized. Be careful to not expose any sensitive information in log messages e.g. secrets, credentials etc. It's especially easy to do by mistake when including a Go struct as value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If log messages or key-value pairs originate from user input they should be validated and sanitized. Be careful to not expose any sensitive information in log messages (secrets, credentials, and so on). It's especially easy to do by mistake when including a Go struct as a value.
```

#### When to use which log level?

- **Debug:** Informational messages of high frequency and/or less-important messages during normal operations.
- **Info:** Informational messages of low frequency and/or important messages.

> - **Warning:** Should in normal cases not be used/needed. If used should be actionable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Warning:** Should in normal cases not be needed. If used, it should be actionable.
```

- **Error:** Error messages indicating some operation failed (with an error) and the program didn't have a way to handle the error.

:::note

> Incoming requests of high frequency are normally more common for the QueryData endpoint since for example the nature of a dashboard generates a request per panel and/or query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Incoming requests of high frequency are normally more common for the `QueryData` endpoint, since--for example--the nature of a dashboard generates a request per panel and/or query.
```

:::

### Inspect logs locally

> Logs from a backend plugin will be consumed by the connected Grafana instance and included in the Grafana server log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logs from a backend plugin are consumed by the connected Grafana instance and included in the Grafana server log.
```

> Each log message for a backend plugin will include a name, `logger=plugin.<plugin id>`, e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each log message for a backend plugin will include a name, `logger=plugin.<plugin id>`. Example:
```

```shell
DEBUG[11-14|15:26:26] Debug msg     logger=plugin.grafana-helloworld-app someID=1
INFO [11-14|15:26:26] Info msg      logger=plugin.grafana-helloworld-app queryType=default
WARN [11-14|15:26:26] Warning msg   logger=plugin.grafana-helloworld-app key=value
ERROR[11-14|15:26:26] Error msg     logger=plugin.grafana-helloworld-app error=An error occurred
```

You can enable [debug logging in your Grafana instance](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/troubleshooting/#troubleshoot-with-logs) and that will normally output a huge amount of information and make it hard to find the logs related to a certain plugin. However, using a named logger makes it convenient to enable debug logging only for a certain named logger and/or plugin:

```
[log]
filters = plugin.<plugin id>:debug
```

> Please refer to [Configure Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#log) for more details setting up logging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please refer to [Configure Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#log) for more details about setting up logging.
```

Consider using metrics to provide real-time insight into the state of resources. If you want to know how responsive your plugin is or identify anomalies that could be early signs of a performance issue, metrics are a key source of visibility.

### Metric types

See [Prometheus metric types](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/) for a list and description of the different metric types you can use and when to use them.

There are many possible types of metrics that can be tracked. One popular method for defining metrics is the [RED method](https://grafana.com/blog/2018/08/02/the-red-method-how-to-instrument-your-services/).

### Implement metrics in your plugin

[Grafana plugin SDK for Go](../../introduction/grafana-plugin-sdk-for-go.md) uses the [Prometheus instrumentation library for Go applications](https://github.com/prometheus/client_golang). Any custom metric registered with the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) will be picked up by the SDK and exposed through the [Collect metrics capability](../../introduction/backend.md#collect-metrics).

> For convenience, It's recommended to use the [promauto package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promauto) when creating custom metrics since it will automatically register the metric in the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables).

Reviewer 2: Typo and minor suggestion:
```suggestion
For convenience, it's recommended to use the [promauto package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promauto) when creating custom metrics since it will automatically register the metric in the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) and expose them to Grafana.
```

> For convenience, It's recommended to use the [promauto package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promauto) when creating custom metrics since it will automatically register the metric in the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For convenience, It's recommended to use the [promauto package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promauto) when creating custom metrics since it automatically registers the metric in the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables).
```

Author: ```suggestion
For convenience, it's recommended to use the [promauto package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promauto) when creating custom metrics since it automatically registers the metric in the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) and expose them to Grafana.
```

**Example:**

```go
package plugin

import (
    "context"

    "github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus"
    "github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promauto"

    "github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend"
)

var queriesTotal = promauto.NewCounterVec(
    prometheus.CounterOpts{
        Namespace: "grafana_plugin",
        Name:      "query",
        Help:      "Total number of queries.",
    },
    []string{"query_type"},
)

func (ds *Datasource) QueryData(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
    for _, q := range req.Queries {
        queriesTotal.WithLabelValues(q.QueryType).Inc()
    }
}
```

> ### Best practices/recommendations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Best practices
```

Reviewer: No slashes except in code. https://developers.google.com/style/slashes

> - Consider using the namespace _grafana_plugin_ as that would prefix any defined metric names with plugin*. This will make it clear for operators that any metric named \*grafana_plugin*\* originates from a Grafana plugin.
> - Use snake case style when naming metrics, e.g. _http_request_duration_seconds_ instead of _httpRequestDurationSeconds_.
> - Use snake case style when naming metric labels, e.g. _status_code_ instead of _statusCode_.
> - If the metric type is a counter, name it with a _\_total suffix_, e.g. _http_requests_total_.
> - If the metric type is a histogram and you're measuring duration, name it with a _`_<unit>`_ suffix, e.g. _http_request_duration_seconds_.
> - If the metric type is a gauge, name it to denote it's a value that can increase and decrease , e.g. _http_request_in_flight_.

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused by the markdown here

![immagine](https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/assets/16373015/c62cd30e-3035-4644-83c1-51e9f5a76ee4)

Maybe you wanted something like:

```suggestion
- Consider using the namespace `grafana_plugin` as that would prefix any defined metric names with `plugin`. This will make it clear for operators that any metric named `grafana_plugin` originates from a Grafana plugin.
- Use snake case style when naming metrics, e.g. `http_request_duration_seconds` instead of `httpRequestDurationSeconds`.
- Use snake case style when naming metric labels, e.g. `status_code` instead of `statusCode`.
- If the metric type is a counter, name it with a `_total` suffix, e.g. `http_requests_total`.
- If the metric type is a histogram and you're measuring duration, name it with a `_<unit>`  suffix, e.g. `http_request_duration_seconds`.
- If the metric type is a gauge, name it to denote it's a value that can increase and decrease , e.g. `http_request_in_flight`.
```

:point_down: 

![immagine](https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/assets/16373015/06551223-ecd6-4985-866a-01cc9bf2fe94)

> #### Label values and high cardinality

Reviewer 2: Do we need a new paragraph for this? We also have other "tips" after this (the one about sanitizing and not exposing secrets) which are probably more suited under "Best practices/recommendations"

Author: I thought it made sense to highlight this specifically because it's important. Similar to what we do under logs best practices as well. Maybe "Validate and sanitize input coming from user input" should be its own H4 here as well like with logs. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I agree. I think having a separate header for "Validate and sanitize input coming from user input" is a good idea :+1:

Author: Updated

> Be careful with what label values you add/accept. Using/allowing too many label values could result in high cardinality problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be careful with what label values you add. Using/allowing too many label values could result in high cardinality problems.
```

> If label values originate from user input they should be validated/cleaned. Use `metricutil.SanitizeLabelName("<label value>")` from pkg/infra/metrics/metricutil package to sanitize label names. Very important to only allow a predefined set of labels to minimize the risk of high cardinality problems.

Author: Room for improvement/possible to skip this. I think the SDK/Grafana should validate/sanitize to ease developer experience. Not sure it's done currently in https://github.com/prometheus/common/blob/6ff04000d9b52262fe36f82f51ab43caa45fb8e6/expfmt/text_create.go#L66 used by the SDK https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/blob/24551aba3f95770be7b3c42f8403e92f449e48b5/backend/diagnostics_adapter.go#L34

Reviewer: Avoid slashes except in code.

Author: Fixed

> If label values originate from user input they should be validated/cleaned. Use `metricutil.SanitizeLabelName("<label value>")` from pkg/infra/metrics/metricutil package to sanitize label names. Very important to only allow a predefined set of labels to minimize the risk of high cardinality problems.

Author: ```suggestion
If label values originate from user input they should be validated and cleaned. Use `metricutil.SanitizeLabelName("<label value>")` from pkg/infra/metrics/metricutil package to sanitize label names. Very important to only allow a predefined set of labels to minimize the risk of high cardinality problems.
```

> Be careful to not expose any sensitive information in label values, e.g. secrets, credentials etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be careful to not expose any sensitive information in label values (secrets, credentials, and so on).
```

### Automatic instrumentation by the SDK

> The SDK provides automatic collection/exposure of Go runtime metrics and process metrics to ease developer and operator experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SDK provides automatic collection and exposure of Go runtime metrics and process metrics to ease developer and operator experience.
```

### Collect and visualize metrics locally

Please refer to [Pull metrics from Grafana backend plugin into Prometheus](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/set-up-grafana-monitoring/#pull-metrics-from-grafana-backend-plugin-into-prometheus).

Further, see [How to collect and visualize logs, metrics and traces](#collect-and-visualize-logs-metrics-and-traces).

## Traces

> Distributed tracing allows backend plugin developers to create custom spans in their plugins, and send them to the same endpoint and with the same propagation format as the main Grafana instance. The tracing context is also propagated from the Grafana instance to the plugin, so the plugin's spans will be correlated to the correct trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Distributed tracing allows backend plugin developers to create custom spans in their plugins, and then send them to the same endpoint and with the same propagation format as the main Grafana instance. The tracing context is also propagated from the Grafana instance to the plugin, so the plugin's spans will be correlated to the correct trace.
```

:::note

> This feature requires at least Grafana 9.5.0, and your plugin needs to be built at least with grafana-plugins-sdk-go v0.157.0. If you run a plugin with tracing features on an older version of Grafana, tracing is disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature requires at least Grafana 9.5.0, and your plugin needs to be built at least with `grafana-plugins-sdk-go v0.157.0`. If you run a plugin with tracing features on an older version of Grafana, tracing will be disabled.
```

:::

### Plugin configuration

> Plugin tracing must be enabled manually on a per-plugin basis, by specifying `tracing = true` in the plugin's config section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugin tracing must be enabled manually on a per-plugin basis. To do so, specify`tracing = true` in the plugin's config section:
```

```
[plugin.myorg-myplugin-datasource]
tracing = true
```

### OpenTelemetry configuration in Grafana

Grafana supports [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) for distributed tracing. If Grafana is configured to use a deprecated tracing system (Jaeger or OpenTracing), then tracing is disabled in the plugin provided by the SDK and configured when calling `datasource.Manage | app.Manage`.

> OpenTelemetry must be enabled and configured for the Grafana instance. Please refer to [Configure Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana#tracingopentelemetry) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry must be enabled and configured for the Grafana instance. Refer to [Configure Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana#tracingopentelemetry) for more information.
```

Refer to the [OpenTelemetry Go SDK](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel) for in-depth documentation about all the features provided by OpenTelemetry.

:::note

If tracing is disabled in Grafana, `backend.DefaultTracer()` returns a no-op tracer.

:::

### Implement tracing in your plugin

:::note

> Make sure you are using at least [grafana-plugin-sdk-go v0.157.0](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/releases/tag/v0.157.0). See [Update the Go SDK](../develop-a-plugin/work-with-backend#update-the-go-sdk) for update instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you are using at least [`grafana-plugin-sdk-go v0.157.0`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/releases/tag/v0.157.0). Refer to [Update the Go SDK](../develop-a-plugin/work-with-backend#update-the-go-sdk) for update instructions.
```

           os.Exit(1)
       }
   }
   ```

1. Once you have configured tracing, use the global tracer like this:

   ```go
   tracing.DefaultTracer()
   ```

   This returns an [OpenTelemetry `trace.Tracer`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace#Tracer) for creating spans.

   **Example:**

   ```go
   func (d *Datasource) query(ctx context.Context, pCtx backend.PluginContext, query backend.DataQuery) (backend.DataResponse, error) {
       ctx, span := tracing.DefaultTracer().Start(
           ctx,
           "query processing",
           trace.WithAttributes(
               attribute.String("query.ref_id", query.RefID),
               attribute.String("query.type", query.QueryType),
               attribute.Int64("query.max_data_points", query.MaxDataPoints),
               attribute.Int64("query.interval_ms", query.Interval.Milliseconds()),
               attribute.Int64("query.time_range.from", query.TimeRange.From.Unix()),
               attribute.Int64("query.time_range.to", query.TimeRange.To.Unix()),
           ),
       )
       defer span.End()

       // ...
   }
   ```

### Automatic instrumentation by the SDK

> The SDK provides some automatic instrumentation to ease developer experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SDK automates some instrumentation to ease developer experience.
```

#### Tracing gRPC calls

> When tracing is enabled, a new span is created automatically for each gRPC call (`QueryData`, `CallResource`, `CheckHealth`, etc.), both on Grafana's side and on the plugin's side. The plugin SDK also injects the trace context into the `context.Context` that is passed to those methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When tracing is enabled, a new span is created automatically for each gRPC call (`QueryData`, `CallResource`, `CheckHealth`, and so on), both on Grafana's side and on the plugin's side. The plugin SDK also injects the trace context into the `context.Context` that is passed to those methods.
```

You can retrieve the [trace.SpanContext](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace#SpanContext) with `tracing.SpanContextFromContext` by passing the original `context.Context` to it:

```go
func (d *Datasource) query(ctx context.Context, pCtx backend.PluginContext, query backend.DataQuery) (backend.DataResponse, error) {
    spanCtx := trace.SpanContextFromContext(ctx)
    traceID := spanCtx.TraceID()

    // ...
}
```

#### Tracing outgoing HTTP requests

> When tracing is enabled, a `TracingMiddleware` is also added to the default middleware stack to all HTTP clients created using the [httpclient.New](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/httpclient#New) or [httpclient.NewProvider](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/httpclient#NewProvider), unless you specify custom middleware. This middleware creates spans for each outgoing HTTP request and provides some useful attributes and events related to the request's lifecycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When tracing is enabled, a `TracingMiddleware` is also added to the default middleware stack to all HTTP clients created using the [`httpclient.New`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/httpclient#New) or [`httpclient.NewProvider`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/httpclient#NewProvider), unless you specify custom middleware. This middleware creates spans for each outgoing HTTP request and provides some useful attributes and events related to the request's lifecycle.
```

### Collect and visualize traces locally

> Please refer to [How to collect and visualize logs, metrics and traces](#collect-and-visualize-logs-metrics-and-traces).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to [How to collect and visualize logs, metrics and traces](#collect-and-visualize-logs-metrics-and-traces).
```

Reviewer: Generally, use "please" only when Grafana has inconvenienced a user and so they must do something additionally.

### Plugin example

Refer to the [datasource-http-backend plugin example](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/tree/main/examples/datasource-http-backend) for a complete example of a plugin with full distributed tracing support.

## Collect and visualize logs, metrics and traces

> If you want to collect and visualize logs, metrics and traces using Loki, Prometheus and Tempo when developing your plugin, please refer to https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/main/devenv/docker/blocks/self-instrumentation which are being used by the Grafana maintainers.

Author: Room for improvement if we could provide this setup automatically for plugin authors in docker setup, https://grafana.com/developers/plugin-tools/get-started/set-up-development-environment

> If you want to collect and visualize logs, metrics and traces using Loki, Prometheus and Tempo when developing your plugin, please refer to https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/main/devenv/docker/blocks/self-instrumentation which are being used by the Grafana maintainers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to collect and visualize logs, metrics and traces using Loki, Prometheus, and Tempo when developing your plugin, refer to https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/main/devenv/docker/blocks/self-instrumentation which are being used by the Grafana maintainers.
```
